# Training a DeepConsensus Model

This tutorial demonstrates how to train DeepConsensus locally using GPUs. This
tutorial is designed to be a starting point from which a more advanced training
pipeline could be developed. Setting up a more advanced training pipeline will
likely be necessary in order to train highly accurate DeepConsensus models.

Training examples can be created with DeepConsensus. See the
[Generate Training Examples](generate_examples.md) for details. For this
tutorial we will use a small toy data set.

These instructions were tested on Google Cloud VM with Intel 16 cores
(n1-standard-16) and 1 x NVIDIA Tesla P100 GPU.

## Clone DeepConsensus source code.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/google/deepconsensus.git
```

## Run the GPU installation script

```
cd deepconsensus
./install-gpu.sh
```

## Install CUDA drivers

```
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/google/deepvariant/r1.4/scripts/install_nvidia_docker.sh -o install_nvidia_docker.sh
bash install_nvidia_docker.sh
```

## Copy training examples to the local directory

```
export DC_TRAIN_DIR="${HOME}/dc-model"
export TF_EXAMPLES="${DC_TRAIN_DIR}/tf-examples"
export DC_TRAIN_OUTPUT="${DC_TRAIN_DIR}/output"

mkdir "${DC_TRAIN_DIR}"
mkdir "${TF_EXAMPLES}"
mkdir "${DC_TRAIN_OUTPUT}"

gsutil cp -R gs://pacbio-collab/pb-dc-training-set/tf-examples/* "${TF_EXAMPLES}/"
```

The path to training examples has to be set in
`deepconsensus/models/model_configs.py` in `_set_custom_data_hparams` function.

For example, if training data is located in /home/user/dc-model/tf-examples the
config will look like this:

```
def _set_custom_data_hparams(params):
  """Updates the given config with values for human data aligned to CCS."""
  params.tf_dataset = ['/home/user/dc-model/tf-examples']
  params.max_passes = 20

```

It is assumed that there are following subdirectories in this path that contain
TensorFlow examples generated by DeepConsensus:

*   train
*   eval
*   test

The directory also contains summary.training.json file.

## Launch training script

```
export PYTHONPATH=$PWD:$PYTHONPATH
export CONFIG=deepconsensus/models/model_configs.py:transformer_learn_values+custom
python3 deepconsensus/models/model_train_custom_loop.py --params ${CONFIG} --out_dir ${DC_TRAIN_OUTPUT} --alsologtostderr
```

## Launch training from a checkpoint (warm-start training)

Beginning training from an existing model checkpoint will generally speed up
most training sessions. In order to start from a checkpoint add `--checkpoint`
parameter that points to the path + prefix of the checkpoint.

## Runtime

By default, training will run for 4 epochs. Batch size is set to 256 by default,
but this is scaled based on the number of GPUs or TPUs available. These values
can be configured by updating the `model_configs.py` file.

The number of steps in an epoch = `<number of examples>` / `<batch_size>`. Once
the training is finished the `$DC_TRAIN_OUTPUT/best_checkpoint.txt` file will
contain the best performing checkpoint. This checkpoint can then be used during
inference.

## Run Inference

The newly trained checkoint can be used to run the inference with DeepConsensus.
See [Run DeepConsensus](quick_start.md#run-deepconsensus) for the
detailed instructions on how to run DeepConsensus.
